Hello again!
In this video, we are going to implement a simple thread pool.
Let's start off by thinking about how we are going to implement this.
We are going to write a class for the thread pool. For a thread pool, we need a fixed size container
of thread objects and a queue of some sort for storing the incoming tasks.
We are going to use a vector of thread objects.
We are going to call the hardware currency function to find out how big to make this vector.
We are going to use the concurrent queue that we wrote in an earlier part of the course for storing tasks.
So those are going to be members of this class.
We will have a public member function of this class which callers can use to get their task functions
pushed onto the queue.
This is going to be called submit.
Each of these threads in the container will have a thread function, which performs an infinite loop.
This
infinite loop will call pop on the queue.
We are going to use the version of the concurrent queue, which has a condition variable.
So if the queue is empty, the thread will stop and wait until some work becomes available.
The queue is concurrent, so only one thread at a time will be able to pop the queue.
If the pop call completes,
we know that this thread has got a task and it is the only one which has that task.
That task will be a callable object, so the thread will simply call it.
Okay, so I would like you to pause the video for a short while and try and write a definition for this
class.
We are going to use this type alias to make things simpler.
The objects in the queue are going to be function objects. The standard function class from the library,
which can represent any callable type.
This is going to store a pointer or lambda expression or whatever, which takes no arguments and returns
nothing.
We are going to have a concurrent queue of these function objects. That will be the work queue.
The worker threads will be on a vector of threads.
We are going to have a worker member function,
which will be the actual thread function for the threads.
Then on the public interface, we have our submit
function which takes an argument of this function object type.
We also have a constructor and destructor for populating and clearing the vector of threads.
OK, so you might want to pause the video again and spend a couple of minutes thinking about how you would
implement these member functions.
The worker function. This is going to be the thread function for the pool of threads.
This has an infinite loop.
In the infinite loop, it calls pop on the work queue. When this call completes, there will be a callable
object in the task argument and then we just call it.
And then when that's complete, we go back to the loop and call pop again and wait for the next task
to become available.
The submit function is even simpler.
We just push the argument onto the work queue.
The thread pool constructor needs to populate the vector, so we call hardware concurrency to find out
how many cores and then we create that number of threads.
We just push them back onto the vector.
The thread function is going to be the worker member function.
So we use the syntax for a member function pointer, which is ampersand, followed by the fully qualified
name.
We also pass the "this" argument to the thread function, because every member function that is not
static, must have the "this" pointer as its first argument.
And then in the destructor, we iterate over this vector and we join on all the thread objects.
Notice
that we use the reference form of the range for loop, because threads are movable, but cannot be copied.
The concurrent queue is exactly the same as the one that we had before.
There should not be anything surprising in there,
I hope!
To use this class, you create an instance of it. So that constructor will populate the vector
with the thread objects.
Then you write a suitable task function.
This one just prints out the thread ID.
There is also a mutex with a lock to make the output look tidy.
Then you call submit function and you pass this task function as its argument.
I have put a sleep function in here, because if you do not put that,
the main function can terminate before
the threads start up.
So this is just to make sure it works properly.
OK, so let's see what happens.
I put in a call to hardware concurrency just so we can see how many cores there are.
This machine has
eight cores.
You can see that thread 6196 was the first one to execute a task function
and it finished
that. Then it popped another one and executed that, then it pops another task and executed that.
Then presumably it was busy by that point.
So some of the other threads have started sharing some of the load.
If you were writing a real program, you would probably have an infinite loop in the main as well,
and
that could, for example, be receiving orders. Then you create a task function to process the order
and then you send that to the thread
pool.
And then one of the threads will pop that task off the queue and execute it.
This implementation is a bit limited because we are restricted to task functions that do not take any
arguments or return anything.
It might be possible to extend this by using a packaged task rather than a
function object.
And then, in the main function, you would obtain a future from the packaged task and call get on it,
to
get the result of the processing.
So that is one possible extension of this.
But anyway, this will give you enough to start experimenting with thread pools.
So have fun!
That's it for this, for this video.
I'll see you next time.
But meanwhile, keep coding!